---
Start date: 2024-08-15
Author(s): wangsijie
Revision: 1
---

# Personal Access Token (PAT)

## Overview

This RFC proposes an extension to Logto's authentication system to support Personal Access Tokens (PATs). This feature aims to provide users with a secure and convenient way to authenticate automated processes and integrations. PATs are long-lived tokens that can be used by non-interactive clients to exchange for short-lived access tokens through token exchange endpoints first introduced in RFC-0005 impersonation.

## Motivation

The current authentication flow in Logto is optimized for interactive user sessions. However, there are scenarios where users need to authenticate non-interactive processes or third-party integrations. These include:

1. Automated scripts or bots that perform actions on behalf of the user.
2. Integration with external tools and services that require API access.
3. Long-running processes that outlast typical session durations.

## Personal Access Token (PAT) creation

The client makes a POST request to the tenant's Management API `/api/users/:userId/personal-access-tokens` to create a PAT for the user. The following parameters are included in the HTTP request entity-body using the `application/json` format.

1. `name`: REQUIRED. A user-defined name for the PAT to identify its purpose, should be unique within the user's account.
2. `expiresAt`: OPTIONAL. The epoch time in milliseconds when the token will expire. If not provided, the token will never expire.

If the request to create a PAT is successful, the tenant's Management API returns the PAT in the response.

1. `name`: REQUIRED. The name of the PAT.
2. `value`: REQUIRED. The value of the PAT.
3. `expiresAt`: OPTIONAL. The epoch time in milliseconds when the token will expire.

### Example PAT creation

```http
POST /api/users/123/personal-access-tokens HTTP/1.1
Host: tenant.logto.app
Content-Type: application/json
Authorization: Bearer <access-token-with-management-api-access>

{
  "name": "My PAT",
}
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "name": "My PAT",
  "value": "pat_W51arOqe7nynW75nWhvYogyc",
  "expiresAt": null
}
```

## Token exchange with PAT

Extend the token exchange flow to accept PATs as subject tokens and exchange them for short-lived access tokens.

### Request

The client makes a token exchange request to the tenant's token endpoint with a special grant type using the HTTP POST method. The following parameters are included in the HTTP request entity-body using the `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` format.

1. `grant_type`: REQUIRED. The value of this parameter must be `urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:token-exchange` indicates that a token exchange is being performed.
2. `resource`: OPTIONAL. The resource indicator, the same as other token requests.
3. `scope`: OPTIONAL. The requested scopes, the same as other token requests.
4. `subject_token`: REQUIRED. The user's PAT.
5. `subject_token_type`: REQUIRED. The type of the security token provided in the `subject_token` parameter. The value of this parameter must be `urn:logto:token-type:personal_access_token`.

For security reasons, the client must authenticate with the token endpoint using the client ID and client secret in the `Authorization` header. Which means the client must be a secure application.

Organization resources are outside this scope of this RFC.

### Response

If the token exchange request is successful, the tenant's token endpoint returns an access token that represents the identity of the user. The response includes the following parameters in the HTTP response entity-body using the `application/json` format.

1. `access_token`: REQUIRED. The access token of the user, which is the same as other token requests like `authorization_code` or `refresh_token`.
2. `issued_token_type`: REQUIRED. The type of the issued token. The value of this parameter must be `urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:access_token`.
3. `token_type`: REQUIRED. The type of the token. The value of this parameter must be `Bearer`.
4. `expires_in`: REQUIRED. The lifetime in seconds of the access token.
5. `scope`: OPTIONAL. The scopes of the access token.

### Example token exchange

```http
POST /oidc/token HTTP/1.1
Host: tenant.logto.app
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
Authorization: Basic <base64(client-id:client-secret)>

grant_type=urn%3Aietf%3Aparams%3Aoauth%3Agrant-type%3Atoken-exchange
&scope=profile
&subject_token=pat_W51arOqe7nynW75nWhvYogyc
&subject_token_type=urn%3Alogto%3Atoken-type%3Apersonal_access_token
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGci...zg",
  "issued_token_type": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:access_token",
  "token_type": "Bearer",
  "expires_in": 3600,
  "scope": "profile"
}
```

The example access token payload:

```json
{
  "jti": "iFtbZBeh2M1cTTBuKbHk4",
  "sub": "123",
  "iss": "https://tenant.logto.app/oidc",
  "exp": 1672531200,
  "iat": 1672527600,
  "scope": "profile",
  "client_id": "client-id",
}
```

## Drawbacks

### 1. Security Risks

PATs are long-lived tokens that can potentially pose security risks if compromised.

PATs can only be used in secured applications, which significantly reduces the risk of unauthorized access. If the application secret is kept safe, this won't be a major security concern. Additionally, we'll implement comprehensive audit logging for all PAT usage.

### 2. Bypass of Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)

PATs may inadvertently provide a way to bypass MFA, as they grant direct access without requiring additional authentication steps. We will add clear notices and warnings to inform users about this policy during PAT creation and management.

## Alternatives

1. Implement a separate authentication flow for non-interactive clients, which may require additional development effort.
2. Use long-lived access tokens, allow the normal access token to be long-lived, the default expiration time is 1 hour and can be extended to longer so that the user can save the access token and use it for a long time. However, this approach is less secure, because there won't be a way to revoke the access token if it's compromised, and there won't be a way to audit the access token usage. Additionally, the access token will be exposed during each request, which increases the risk of interception.

## Future Possibilities

1. Ability to downscope PAT permissions and scopes.
